---
title: An Introduction to Paradoxes
author: Mike Song
date: 2023-5-20
---

#### Author: Mike Song

The term “paradox”, used in a non literary, but rather philosophical, mathematical, and scientific sense, often refers to a statement, situation, or proposition, that is often found contradictory after a usually somewhat sound chain of logic. The word itself originates from the Greek word “ paradoxon”, meaning contrary opinion, which itself was derived from the two Greek words para and doxa, <!-- more -->meaning distinct from and opinion respectively. Other possible origins include the Greek word “ parádoxos”, meaning unexpected or strange. In this article, I intend to focus on the antinomians type of paradox in the Quine classification, which reaches a self contradictory or questionable result via applying sound logic. I will also talk about the different types of antinomy paradoxes, and common topics as well as examples of theses paradoxes.

Firstly, we will look at some Greek paradoxes, starting where the word itself originated. A famous example is thesis’s boat, talking about how if you slowly replace every single part of an old boat with an identical piece, can it still be referred to as the original boat? A similar example deals with biological discoveries in the modern world, though it is not from Ancient Greece, I believe the degree of similarity is sufficient enough for it to be put in this paragraph. Your cells are being killed and replaced every second, and every seven to ten years, so, when you may be a wholly different person every decade. An Ancient Greek philosopher, Zeno, is famous for his seemingly absurd paradoxes. He states that if a slower runner starts before the faster one in a race, the quicker runner can never exceed the slower one, since the pursuer must first reach the point whence the pursued started, so that the slower must always hold a lead. This is obviously falsifiable in real life, but it is an interesting thought experiment nonetheless.In the arrow paradox, Zeno states that for motion to occur, an object must change the position which it occupies. He gives an example of an arrow in flight. He states that in any one (duration-less) instant of time, the arrow is neither moving to where it is, nor to where it is not. It cannot move to where it is not, because no time elapses for it to move there; it cannot move to where it is, because it is already there. In other words, at every instant of time there is no motion occurring. If everything is motionless at every instant, and time is entirely composed of instants, then motion is impossible.

Now, we jump from the extremely ancient to the unimaginably futuristic, for we turn to the paradoxes associated with time travel. This paragraph will focus on three main paradoxes. A causal loop is a paradox that occurs when a future event causes an event in the past, usually through time travel, and this event, in turn, causes another future event. This might be somewhat confusing, so it is time for an example. For example , Gino is trying to programme his website. However, he hears a noise and tells whoever made that noise to keep it down. But in the future, Gino finds himself discussing the logistics of time travel with Bill Nye, and Bill claims to have invented time travel, to prove it, Bill transports Gino to when he is programming. Astonished, Gino screams, and that is the sound he hears in the first scene. This paradox can also be called the bootstrap paradox, foreseeable paradox, and ontological paradox. The infamous grandfather paradox concerns itself with contradiction in actions in the past and time traveling to the past. It states that if you go back to the past before your parents were born and kill one of your grandparents, you would not be born and would not be able to kill your grandparents. Newcomb’s paradox concerns itself with the topic of free will in time travel, stating that if perfect predictors of the future exist, for example if time travel exists as a mechanism for making perfect predictions, then perfect predictions appear to contradict free will because decisions apparently made with free will are already known to the perfect predictor.

Now we reach some of my personal favorites , paradoxes that deal with language, meaning, and paradoxes of Russell. The most famous one of these paradoxes is the barber’s paradox. In this paradox, a barber aims to shave everyone in the town who doesn’t shave themselves. The question arises, should he shave himself? Of he shaves himself, then he does need to shave the barber since he already shaves himself. But if he doesn’t shave himself, then he needs to shave himself because he needs to shave for all who don’t shave themselves. As it becomes clear, this is self contradictory. The second concerns itself it’s a liar. A person says,”I am lying.” But if he is truly lying, then he is not lying and telling the truth, but if he is telling the truth, then he is lying. Another related paradox pinnochio-lizes this one. Pinocchio says,”my nose will grow”. For if he says that and he is not lying, his nose will not grow for he is telling the truth. But the event is opposite from what he says, which means his nose will indeed grow. This scenario also works in the reverse. The third one deals with specific words in the English language. The word autological describes words that expresses the property or properties that itself possesses. For example, the word “noun” is a noun, and the word “ pentasyllabic” has exactly five syllables. However, a heterological word doesn’t have the properties it possesses. For example, the word “monosyllabic” does not have only one syllable, but rather five. The word “ verb” is not a verb, but rather a noun. Here we are faced with the dilemma, is heterological a heterological word? For if it is, then it doesn’t describe itself, which means that it does. If it is not, then it is autological, which means that it describes itself, and so does not describe itself.

In the last paragraph, I wish the reader to consider three more weird paradoxes. When you buy a lottery, it will be natural for you to think that the ticket you buy will not be the winning one, and assuming that every ticket that you see will not be the winning one is also natural, since there is an extremely small probability that one would win. However, of course, you know that one ticket will win. So you’re justified in believing what you know to be false (that no ticket will win). How can that be? The second paradox holds closer to life. A teacher announces to her class that there will be a surprise “practice” sometime during the following week. The students begin to speculate about when it might occur, until one of them announces that there is no reason to worry, because a surprise “practice” is impossible. The “practice” cannot be given on Friday, she says, because by the end of the day on Thursday we would know that the “practice” must be given the next day. Nor can the “practice” be given on Thursday, she continues, because, given that we know that the “practice” cannot be given on Friday, by the end of the day on Wednesday we would know that the “practice” must be given the next day. And likewise for Wednesday, Tuesday, and Monday. The students spend a restful weekend not studying for the “practice”, and they are all surprised when it is given on Wednesday. How could this happen? The third one is much more mind blowing. It concerns itself with a hotel with infinite rooms that is already full with guests.Suppose a new guest arrives and wishes to be accommodated in the hotel. We can (simultaneously) move the guest currently in room 1 to room 2, the guest currently in room 2 to room 3, and so on, moving every guest from their current room n to room n+1. After this, room 1 is empty and the new guest can be moved into that room. By repeating this procedure, it is possible to make room for any finite number of new guests. In general, assume that k guests seek a room. We can apply the same procedure and move every guest from room n to room n + k. In a similar manner, if k guests wished to leave the hotel, every guest moves from room n to room n − k.It is also possible to accommodate a countably infinite number of new guests: just move the person occupying room 1 to room 2, the guest occupying room 2 to room 4, and, in general, the guest occupying room n to room 2n (2 times n), and all the odd-numbered rooms (which are countably infinite) will be free for the new guests.

